---
title: "Why EquationOfTime?"
date: 2024-01-05
---
Think about this for a minute, then keep reading for the answer: *How often does a sundial display the same time as a standard clock?*

## Clocks are awesome
Clocks are simple mechanical computers. Within them are multipliers and dividers, internal state, and powered by an oscillator that can advance that state 
at a known rate (Read about a clock's escapement [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escapement). Something I personally find fascinating and beautiful).

Before digital circuits (and even electricity), people were building these simple mechanical computers to keep track of the time. As technology advanced, 
we actually started to build more complex mechanical computers. We saw machines like the [Stepped Reckoner](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stepped_reckoner) the 
[Pascaline](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal%27s_calculator) and [Babbage's difference engines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Difference_engine). All were
the result of some brilliant engineering and passionate people who worked hard to move the needle of technological advancement. 

At the time these machines were introduced, they really weren't better than the way they were already done. Calculation machines were 
expensive to build, and could only perform simple calculations. Mechanical clocks weren't accurate, and had to be constantly adjusted to show solar time
(The time that would be shown on a sundial, the primary time keeping device at the time). These disruptive innovations 
eventually dominated the way in which things were done, but only through a great deal of effort from some very passionate people who were able to see the potential
in the solution they espoused.

Speaking of solar time, the biggest challenge those first mechanical clocks had was that they did not show the same time as would be seen on a sundial. 
Because the earth tilts as it orbits the sun, a sundial compared to a clock could be ahead or behind up to 15 minutes throughout the year, depending on the time of year.
Unless you knew at every point during the year how many minutes to adjust your timekeeping device, you would have trouble synchronizing
time with someone else. You would also have a difficult time trying to set your clock correctly, something which had to happen
fairly regularly as early clocks did not keep accurate time (Another advantage of a sundial, you never had to set it). 
This discrepancy is referred to as the "equation of time". Something many early clocks would display as a separate dial. 

The equation of time helped reconcile the difference between the sundial and the clock. Making clocks "usable", but actually facilitating the transition to the new technology. 
Clocks as we know them still don't tell "true solar time". But, after some time we realized that didn't really matter. 
Instead, we embraced the new way of doing things, and through many more advancements, the clock of the medieval age
became the modern digital computer.

## Conclusion 

To answer the question at the start: Four days per year, a sundial will show the same time as a normal clock. But what's important is that you likely didn't know that,
and *no one needs to know that*. We've moved onto much bigger and more complex systems. And that which used to be necessary, is now considered archaic.   

The goal of the posts and articles contained within this site is to illuminate and expand on technical concepts, especially those related to software testing, and software development. 
Software testing and development is an art form, which means there are no easy answers to anything. And disruptive innovation 
will always appear as though we've made our work more complicated for little gain. But maybe some of these words on these pages will serve as an 
"equation of time", and help reconcile the differences between what currently is, and what _could be_
